the following program is brought to you
by element14 the electronics community
where you can connect and collaborate
with top engineers from around the world
join now at element14.com slash presents
hi and welcome back to the learning
circuit today we're going to learn about
integrated circuits or ICS so far in
this series I focused on discrete
components electronic devices
constructed as a single unit such as
transistors resistors capacitors and
diodes but I've wanted to make things a
little more interesting dive a little
deeper and to do that we need to get
into integrated circuits while the
screen components have a single simple
function ICS take those components and
integrate them into circuits on a single
chip hence integrated circuit if you've
ever opened up a piece of electronics
and checked out the PCB you've probably
seen these little black squares or
rectangles those are integrated circuits
ICS let's start with looking at one very
common I see a 741 op amp here's the
schematic diagram found in the chips
datasheet hopefully by now you'll
recognize all these symbols being 22
transistors 12 resistors and one
capacitor now rather than the circuit
being made of discrete components
soldered onto a PCB the entire circuit
is printed onto a single piece of
silicon all those transistors resistors
and capacitors are in there made of tiny
n-type and p-type structures connected
on the surface by aluminum plating now
ICS are already pretty small but the
actual functional part of the chip
inside is even smaller the silicon chips
inside the casing are so small that they
have tiny wires running through the
casing that connected this tiny chip to
the external pins and terminals let's
take a look at what those external
casings look like some simple ICS that
don't require many pins make use of
packages designed for discrete
components like those of transistors
like these voltage regulators that
utilize the same packaging as MOSFETs
others like these single inline packages
have more pins but along only one side
through-hole chips with contacts don't
to opposite sides
our dual inline packages or dips dips
often use sockets so they may easily be
replaced if damaged small outline
packages include varieties of surface
mount chips such as SOI CS T stops and s
o J's for more complex ICS that require
more input/output or IO chip carriers
have J shaped pins or metal pads on all
four sides of the package and still some
integrated circuits require so many
connections that they use grid arrays
pins for through-hole and falls for
surface mount now to figure out the pin
numbering in all these chips you can
often find a notch or dot on one of the
edges or corners pin one will be at or
to the left of the dot or notch and
continuing down the left side around the
chip and in counter clockwise fashion
the pin out on four sided chips may be
less straightforward the dot on these
can be in one of the corners or in the
middle of one side so that the one side
is split having pins at both the
beginning and end of the numbering
scheme integrated circuits can be broken
down into three basic categories digital
analog or a combination of the two
[Music]
analog or linear ICS respond to produce
and/or amplify signals of varying
degrees of voltage two of the most
common types of analog ICS are op amps
and voltage regulators
operational amplifiers or op amps offer
a high gain over a wide range of
frequencies while the chips have eight
pins the schematic symbol only shows
five leads the remaining three pins that
are not typically represented by the
symbol are specialized and used for fine
tuning keep an eye out for that symbol
as op amps are often incorporated into
other ICS voltage regulators regulate
voltage by automatically adjusting the
amount of current flowing through a load
in order to maintain a constant output
voltage they typically have an input
voltage range and can have either a
single fixed output voltage or an
adjustable output voltage range
[Music]
analog circuits are quite useful but if
we want to be able to process or store
data we need digital electronics digital
circuits operate using only two states
high and low often represented by 1 & 0
respectively digital ICS include logic
gates flip-flops shift registers
counters memories and processors much of
electronics revolves around logic if
this is happening then this should
happen this is where logic gates come in
a logic gate uses the conditions of its
input or inputs to determine the state
of its output they include not gates
also called inverters and NAND or nor
xor and X nor in the same category there
are also flip-flops and latches with
each logic gate only requiring a few
pins rather than being packaged
individually they are often bundled
together with multiple gates in a single
chip when looking at logic circuits
you'll likely come across a few
abbreviations that would be helpful to
know TTL transistor transistor logic ECL
emitter coupled logic CMOS complementary
metal-oxide-semiconductor x' using
MOSFETs while these can be made with
discrete components they can often be
found as an IC next in digital ICS are
memory chips the two main types being
random access memory RAM and read-only
memory
ROM Ram is the type of memory like in
your computer that can be read and
written over and over again ROM cannot
be written over and is typically
programmed at the factory though you may
hear of EEPROM erasable programmable
read-only memory that can be
reprogrammed by an individual these
chips have a transparent window that
allows for the UV light exposure
required to be able to rewrite the chip
however they have mostly been replaced
by EEE proms which can be programmed and
erased in circuit
[Music]
some integrated circuits are
mixed-signal incorporating both analog
and digital signals let's start by
talking about converters an analog to
digital converter or ADC receives an
analog input signal and outputs a 4-bit
binary number that is proportional to
the analog voltage it measured a digital
to analog converter or DAC takes a
binary number and converts it to an
analog voltage that is proportional to
the binary number but the most exciting
mixed-signal ICS RMC use not the Marvel
Cinematic Universe but microcontrollers
a microcontroller is essentially a
computer on a chip it has a simple
microprocessor flash memory for holding
its single program RAM for holding
temporary data and lots of general
purpose input/output known as GPIO MCS
are considered mixed signal because many
include an ADC or a DAC on chip they are
commonly found as the brains of larger
boards which are also confusingly
referred to as microcontrollers such as
Arduino zorb eaglebones
the last I see I want to talk about is
one that's incredibly useful it's
inexpensive and quite robust but it
falls in a bit of a fuzzy area when
being defined as analog or digital the
555 timer this little 8 pin chip
contains two comparators a flip-flop and
inverter two transistors and a voltage
divider it can be used as an oscillator
for use in LED flashers logic clocks
tone generators pulse generators simple
ADCs and more it can function as a
one-shot pulse generator for use in
timers touch switches capacitance
measurement and PWM it can also function
as what is called a Schmitt trigger
functioning as a flip-flop 5 v 5s can
also be found in pairs in the 14 pin 556
IC chips or for to a chip in the 16 pin
5 v 8 in future episodes I'll be diving
a little deeper into some of the ICS I
mentioned today including voltage
regulators op amps and five-five-five
timers but what other ICS do you want to
learn about or is there a project you've
been dying to see that includes one of
the ICS I mentioned today tell me about
your ideas on the element14 community on
element14.com /the learning circuit
happy learning
[Music]